You mentioned that, um,
a theory of everything may be quite difficult to come by a theory of everything
broadly defined, meaning like truly a theory of everything. Yeah.
But let's look at a more narrow theory of everything,
which is that what the way it's used in often in physics is, uh,
a theory that unifies our, our current, uh,
laws of physics. Yeah. Uh, general relativity, uh, quantum field theory.
Do you have, uh, thoughts on this dream of a,
of a theory of everything in physics? How close are we?
Is there any promising ideas out there in your view?
Well, it would be nice to have <laugh> it would be aesthetically pleasing,
uh, will be useful. No, probably not. Well I'm, I shouldn't,
it's dangerous to say that, but, uh, probably not. I think we, uh, not,
not in, certainly not in the, uh, foreseeable future.
Maybe to understand black holes.
Yeah. But that's, that's yes. Maybe to understand black holes,
but that's not useful. <laugh> that my, and,
and, well, not only, I mean, only to understand it's, it's, it's worse,
you know,
it's not useful in the sense that we're not gonna be basing any technology
anytime soon on black holes, but it's, it's more severe than that.
I would say it's that the kinds of questions about black holes
that we can't answer within the framework of existing theory,
uh,
are ones that are not going to be susceptible to,
to astronomical observation in the foreseeable future.
There are questions about very, very small black holes when, uh,
when quantum effects come into play or, uh, uh,
so that black holes are, uh, you know, not, not black holes.
They're, they're, they're, they're emitting haw. Well,
this discovery of Hawking called Hawking radiation,
which for astronomical black holes is a tiny, tiny effect. That's no one ever,
no one has ever observed. It's a prediction.
That's never been changed, like super massive black holes that doesn't apply.
No, no. The,
the predicted rate of radiation from those black holes is so
tiny that it's absolute the UN observable and is overwhelmed by all kinds of
other effects. Uh, so, uh,
so it's not practical in the sense of technology.
It's not even practical in the sense of, uh, uh,
application to astronomy. The, the, we are existing theory of,
uh, general Relic and quantum theory.
And our theory of the,
the different fundamental forces is perfectly adequate to all pro all
problems of, uh,
technology for sure. Uh, and
almost all problems of astrophysics and
cosmology that appear except with the,
with the notable exception of the extremely early universe.
If you want to ask what happened before the big bang or what happened right.
At the big bang, uh, which would be a great thing to understand, of course.
Uh, yes, we don't. But, uh, but.
What about the engineering question? So if we look at, uh, space travel, so,
uh, I, I think you've spoken with them, uh, Eric Weinstein. Oh yeah, really. Um,
uh, you know, he says things like, we want to get off this planet.
His intuition is almost a motivator for the engineering project of
space exploration in order for us to crack this problem of becoming a multi
planetary species have to solve the physics problem. His intuition is like,
if we figure out the, what he calls the source code, which is like,
like, like,
like a theory of everything might give us clues on how to start
hacking the fabric of reality, like getting.
Shortcuts. Right. It might, I can't say that, you know, <affirmative>,
I can't say that it won't,
but I can say that in the 1970s and early
1980s,
we achieved huge steps in
understanding matter, uh, Q, C, D uh,
much better understanding of the weak interaction,
much under better understanding of quantum mechanics in general.
And it's had minimal, uh, minimal impact on, on rocket.
Design, on proport.
Certainly on rocket design, on anything, any technology whatsoever.
And now we're talking about much more esoteric things.
And since I don't know what they are,
I say for sure that they won't affect technology, but I'm very,
very skeptical that they, they would affect technology. The, uh, uh,
the, because, you know, to access them,
you need to very exotic circumstances to make new kinds of particles with high
energy. You need accelerators that are, you know,
it's very expensive and you don't produce many, many of them. And so, you know,
it's just, uh, it's a pipe dream, I think yeah. About space exploration. Yes.
I'm not sure exactly what he has in mind. And, uh, but, uh, to me,
uh, it's more a problem of, of,
I don't something between biology and oh, yeah. And, and,
uh, maybe a little AI and, and information processing, what you mean,
how should I,
I think human bodies are not well adapted to space. Yeah.
Even Mars or even, you know, know,
which is the closest thing to a kind of human environment that we're gonna find
anywhere close by, uh, very,
very difficult to maintain humans on Mars, uh,
and gonna be, you know, very expensive and very, you know, very unstable.
And, but I think the pro how I ever, uh, if we
take a broader view of what it means
to bring human civilization
outside of the earth, if we're satisfied with, you know,
sending minds out there that we can converse with and actuators,
and that, that we can in, uh, uh,
manipulate and sensors that we can get feedback from. I think that's,
that's where it's at. <laugh> for sure. I think that's so much,
so much more realistic. And, uh,
and I think that that's the long term future of, uh,
space exploration. It's not holding human bodies all over the place and that's,
that's, that's just silly. <laugh> well.
It's, it's possible that human bodies. Um, so like you said,
it's a biology problem what's possible is that, um,
we extend human lab Spann in some way. Just,
we have to look at a bigger picture. It could be just like you're saying,
by sending robots with actuators and kind of extending
the, the, our limbs, but it could also be extending some aspect of our minds,
so information.
And it could be cyborgs. It could be, uh, it could be now we're talking,
<laugh> not, it could be, you know, it could, uh, it could be,
uh,
human brains or cells that realize something like human brain architecture,
uh, within, uh, uh,
within artificial environments, you know, shells, if you like that,
that are more adapted to the conditions of space and, uh, that yeah,
so that that's entirely man machine hybrids,
as well as sort of remote, uh,
outposts that we can communicate with. I think, I think those,
those will happen. And, uh.
Yeah, to me, there's some sense in which,
as opposed to understanding the physics of, of, um,
the, the, the, the fundamental fabric of the universe,
I think getting to the physics of life, the physics of intelligence,
the physics of consciousness will the physics of information, uh,
that, that, uh, that brings, uh, from,
for mergers that will allow us to do space exploration.
Yeah. I, well, I think physics in the larger sense has a lot to contribute here.
Yeah. Not the physics of finding fundamental new laws in the sense of, uh,
you know, another qu or axons, even <laugh> the, the, uh, but,
uh, uh, physics in the sense of, you know,
physics has a lot of experience in analyzing complex situations
and analyzing new states of matter and devising new kinds of instruments that do
clever things. We, you know, we, the,
the physics in that sense has enormous amounts to contribute to, uh,
this kind of endeavor.
But I don't think that looking for a
so-called theory of any, everything has much to do with it at all.